[security][9.0] Creates Automatic Migrations guide (#713)
elastic/docs-content: solutions/security/get-started/automatic-migration.md

::::

Automatic Migration for detection rules helps you quickly convert SIEM rules from the Splunk Processing Language (SPL) to the Elasticsearch Query Language ({{esql}}). If comparable Elastic-authored rules exist, it simplifies onboarding by mapping your rules to them. Otherwise, it creates custom rules on the fly so you can verify and edit them instead of writing them from scratch.

You can ingest your data before migrating your rules, or migrate your rules first in which case the tool will recommend which data sources you need to power your migrated rules. 

::::{admonition} Requirements
* The `SIEM migrations: All` Security sub-feature privilege.
* A working [LLM connector](/solutions/security/ai/set-up-connectors-for-large-language-models-llm.md).
* {{stack}} users: an [Enterprise](https://www.elastic.co/pricing) subscription. 
* {{Stack}} users: {{ml}} must be enabled.
* {{serverless-short}} users: a [Security Complete](../../../deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/project-settings.md) subscription.

> * {{ecloud}} users: {{ml}} must be enabled. We recommend a minimum size of 4GB of RAM per {ml} zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* {{ecloud}} users: {{ml}} must be enabled. We recommend a minimum size of 4GB of RAM per {{ml}} zone.
```

7. Click **Translate** to start the rule translation process. You don't need to stay on this page. A notification will appear when the process is complete. 

8. When migration is complete, click the notification or return to the **Get started** page then click **View translated rules** to open the **Translated rules** page. 

## The Translated rules page

This section describes the **Translated rules** page's interface and explains how the data that appears here is derived. 

When you upload a new batch of rules, they are assigned a name and number, for example `SIEM rule migration 1`, or `SIEM rule migration 2`. Use the **Migrations** dropdown menu in the upper right to select which batch appears. 

::::{image} ../../../images/security-siem-migration-processed-rules.png
:alt: The translated rules page
:width: 850px
:screenshot:
::::

The table's fields are as follows:

> * **Name:** The names of Elastic authored rules cannot be edited until after rule installation. To edit the name of a custom translated rule, click the name and select **Edit**.

Reviewer: There's some variation in the way this is constructed throughout the page. Our style guide recommends hyphenating words that create a compound adjective, so that's what I would suggest: https://docs.elastic.dev/tech-writing-guidelines/grammar-spelling#dashes-and-hyphens

```suggestion
* **Name:** The names of Elastic-authored rules cannot be edited until after rule installation. To edit the name of a custom translated rule, click the name and select **Edit**.
```

* **Status:** The rule's translation status:
  * `Installed`: Already added to Elastic SIEM. Click **View** to manage and enable it.
  * `Translated`: Ready to install. This rule was mapped to an Elastic-authored rule, or translated by Automatic Import. Click **Install** to install it.
  * `Partially translated`: Part of the query could not be translated. You may need to specify an index pattern for the rule query, upload missing macros or lookups, or fix broken rule syntax.
  * `Not translated`: None of the original query could be translated.
  * `Error`: Rule translation failed. Refer to the the error details.
* **Risk Score:** For Elastic authored rules, risk scores are predefined. For custom translated rules, risk scores are defined as follows:
  * If the source rule has a field comparable to Elastic's risk score, we use that value.
  * Otherwise, if the source rule has a field comparable to Elastic's rule severity field, we base the risk score on that value according to these [guidelines](/solutions/security/detect-and-alert/create-detection-rule.md#custom-highlighted-esql-fields).

>   * Otherwise, a default value is assigned.

Reviewer 2: @benironside The link for guideline is wrong, should be: /solutions/security/detect-and-alert/create-detection-rule#rule-ui-basic-params

@nastasha-solomon My understanding is: 
1. if risk score is present, and comparable to Elastic risk score we use that value,
2. if risk score is missing, but severity field is present, base risk score on severity according to guideline,
3. else -> default value. 

Does it help?

>   * Otherwise, a default value is assigned.

Reviewer: Sorta? @approksiu are you saying the third item only happens if the conditions in the second one aren't met? 

Fwiw, I imagine these "if-then-else" statements are crystal clear to more technical folks. I'm only suggesting some additional context for the third item so it's more accesible to a broader audience (i.e., users who aren't developers or developer-adjacent). For example, this revision isn't overly wordy but does convey the "else" relationship between the second and third items:

  * If a risk score is present, and comparable to Elastic risk score we use that value,
  * If a risk score is missing, but severity field is present, base risk score on severity according to guideline.
  * If a risk score and severity field aren't present, a default value is assigned.

>   * Otherwise, a default value is assigned.

Reviewer: Changes look good, @benironside!

::::{image} ../../../images/security-siem-migration-edit-rule.png
:alt: The rule details flyout
:width: 850px
:screenshot:
::::

::::{note}
If you haven't yet ingested your data, you will likely encounter `Unknown index` or `Unknown column` errors while editing. You can ignore these and add your data later.
::::

### View rule details

The rule details flyout which appears when you click on a rule's name in the **Translate rules** table has two other tabs, **Overview** and **Summary**. The **Overview** tab displays information such as the rule's severity, risk score, rule type, and how frequently it runs. The **Summary** tab explains the logic behind how the rule was translated, such as why specific {{esql}} commands were used, or why a source rule was mapped to a particular Elastic authored rule.

::::{important}
All the details about your migrations is stored in the `.kibana-siem-rule-migrations-rules-default` index. You can use [Discover](/explore-analyze/discover.md) to review a variety of metrics, analyze metrics, and more.
::::

# FAQ (Frequently asked questions)

> **How does Automatic Migration handle rules that can't be exactly translated, such as due to feature parity issues?**

Reviewer: Optional edit - the second half of this sentence is constructed a little oddly.

```suggestion
**How does Automatic Migration handle rules that can't be exactly translated for various reasons, such as feature parity issues?**
```

After translation, rules that can't be translated appear with a status of either partially translated (yellow) or not translated (red). From there, you can address them individually.

**How does Automatic Migration handle Splunk rules which lookup other indices?**

> Rules that fall into this category will typically appear with a status of partially translated. Lookup JOINs are currently a tech preview {{esql}} which can help in this situation. 

Reviewer: This would be a good opportunity to link to the ES|QL lookup join  docs: https://docs-v3-preview.elastic.dev/elastic/elasticsearch/tree/main/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-lookup-join

Also, minor style change here:

```suggestion
Rules that fall into this category will typically appear with a status of partially translated. `LOOKUP JOIN`s are currently a tech preview {{esql}} which can help in this situation. 
```

**How can we ensure rules stay up to date?**

Automatic Migration maps your rules to Elastic-authored rules whenever possible, which are updated automatically. Like all custom rules, rules created by Automatic Migration must be maintained by you.

**What index does information about each migration appear in?**

No matter how many times you use Automatic Migration, migration data will continue to appear in `.kibana-siem-rule-migrations-rules-default`.

**How does Automatic Migration handle Splunk rules which lookup other indices?**

> Rules that fall into this category will typically appear with a status of partially translated. You can use the [`LOOKUP JOIN](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/esql-lookup-join.md) capability to help in this situation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rules that fall into this category will typically appear with a status of partially translated. You can use the [`LOOKUP JOIN`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/esql-lookup-join.md) capability to help in this situation. 
```
